Add documentation on EventPipe (#21515)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/eventpipe.md

---
title: EventPipe Overview
description: Learn about EventPipe and how to use it for tracing your .NET applications to diagnose performance issues.
ms.date: 11/09/2020
ms.topic: overview
---

# EventPipe

> EventPipe is a runtime (CoreCLR) component that can be used as one of tracing egression points, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on OS-native components such as ETW or LTTng.

Author: I don't want to call out Mono yet before we ship .NET 6.

> EventPipe is a runtime (CoreCLR) component that can be used as one of tracing egression points, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on OS-native components such as ETW or LTTng.

Reviewer: I was thinking of whether we should remove the callout entirely rather than including Mono.

> EventPipe is a runtime (CoreCLR) component that can be used as one of tracing egression points, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on OS-native components such as ETW or LTTng.

Author: Hmm.... I'm not so sure. I guess the doc itself is in Core so I guess it'd be fine to remove it? The goal was to disambiguate CoreCLR with Mono because both are now '.NET' - but I'll remove it for now. Thanks!

> EventPipe is a runtime (CoreCLR) component that can be used as one of tracing egression points, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on OS-native components such as ETW or LTTng.

Author: I don't think EventPipe is a communication point with the runtime...? That sounds more like a description for diagnostic port.

> EventPipe is a runtime (CoreCLR) component that can be used as one of tracing egression points, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on OS-native components such as ETW or LTTng.

Reviewer: Ah, that's true

The table below is a summary of the differences between EventPipe and ETW/LTTng.

## Use EventPipe to trace your .NET application

You can use EventPipe to trace your .NET application in many ways:

* Use one of the [diagnostics tools](#tools-using-eventpipe) that are built on top of EventPipe.

* Use [Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/diagnostics-client-library-instructions.md) library to write your own tool to configure and start EventPipe sessions yourself.

* Use [environment variables](#trace-using-environment-variables) to start EventPipe.

After you've produced a `nettrace` file that contains your EventPipe events, this can be viewed in [`PerfView`](https://github.com/Microsoft/perfview#perfview-overview) or Visual Studio.

You can also analyze EventPipe traces programmatically with [TraceEvent](https://github.com/Microsoft/perfview/blob/master/documentation/TraceEvent/TraceEventLibrary.md).

> ### Tools using EventPipe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Tools that use EventPipe
```

This is the easiest way to use EventPipe to trace your application. To learn more about how to use each of these tools, refer to each tools' documentation.

* [dotnet-counters](./dotnet-counters.md) lets you monitor/collect various metrics emitted by the .NET runtime and core libraries, as well as custom metrics you can write.

* [dotnet-gcdump](./dotnet-gcdump.md) lets you collect GC heap dump of applications for analyzing your application's managed heap.

* [dotnet-trace](./dotnet-trace.md) lets you collect traces of applications to analyze for performance.

## Trace using environment variables

The preferred mechanism for using EventPipe is to use `dotnet-trace` or `Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client` library.

> However, you can use the following environment variables to set up an EventPipe session on an app and have it write the trace directly to a file. To stop tracing, you need to exit the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preferred mechanism for using EventPipe is to use `dotnet-trace` or `Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client` library, however, you can use the following environment variables to set up an EventPipe session that writes the trace directly to a file. To stop tracing, you need to exit the application.
```

Author: pretty sure `, however,` is a comma-splice...? Let me go look up the grammar again

Reviewer 2: For ease of localization, multiple shorter sentences are usually better than one longer sentence.

Reviewer: You're correct.  I was thinking of when you use it as an aside, e.g., "You, however, should do otherwise", but in this case it's a conjunctive adverb.  You need to complete the first clause, e.g., "I said to use a comma before the conjunctive adverb; however, that was incorrect!" 😆.  That's what I get for trying to recall English grammar rules.

* `COMPlus_EnableEventPipe`: Setting this to `1` starts an EventPipe session that writes directly to a file. By default this is `0`.

* `COMPlus_EventPipeOutputPath`: This is the path to the output EventPipe trace file when it is configured to run via `COMPlus_EnableEventPipe`. By default this is `trace.nettrace` which will be created in the same directory the app that is running from.

* `COMPlus_CircularBufferMB`: This is the size of the internal buffer size that is used by EventPipe when it is configured to run via `COMPlus_EnableEventPipe`.

* `COMPlus_EventPipeConfig`: This environment variable can be used to set up the EventPipe session configuration when setting up an EventPipe session with `COMPlus_EnableEventPipe`.

The syntax is as following:

> * `<provider>:<keyword>:<level>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `<provider>:<keyword>:<level>`
```

You can also specify multiple providers by concatenating them with comma:

> * `<provider1>:<keyword1>:<level1>,<provider2>:<keyword2>:<level2>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `<provider1>:<keyword1>:<level1>,<provider2>:<keyword2>:<level2>`
```

> If this environment variable is not set but EventPipe is enabled by COMPlus_EnableEventPipe, it will start tracing by enabling the following providers with the following keywords and level:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If this environment variable is not set but EventPipe is enabled by `COMPlus_EnableEventPipe`, it will start tracing by enabling the following providers with the following keywords and levels:
```

1. `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:4c14fccbd:5`

> 2. `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntimePrivate:4002000b:5`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntimePrivate:4002000b:5`
```

> 3. `Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler:0:5`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler:0:5`
```

---
title: EventPipe Overview
description: Learn about EventPipe and how to use it for tracing your .NET applications to diagnose performance issues.
ms.date: 11/09/2020
ms.topic: overview
---

# EventPipe

> EventPipe is a runtime component that can be used as one of tracing egression points, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on OS-native components such as ETW or LTTng.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EventPipe is a runtime component that can be used to collect tracing data, similar to ETW or LTTng. The goal of EventPipe is to allow .NET developers to easily trace their .NET applications without having to rely on platform-specific components such as ETW or LTTng.
```

EventPipe is the mechanism behind many of the diagnostic tools and can be used for consuming events emitted by the runtime as well as custom events written with [EventSource](xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource).

> This article is a high-level overview of EventPipe describing when and how use EventPipe, and how to configure it to best suit your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article is a high-level overview of EventPipe describing when and how to use EventPipe, and how to configure it to best suit your needs.
```

## EventPipe basics

> EventPipe aggregates events emitted by runtime components - for example, the Just-In-Time compiler or the garbage collector - as well as events are written from [EventSource](xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource) instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EventPipe aggregates events emitted by runtime components - for example, the Just-In-Time compiler or the garbage collector - with events written from [EventSource](xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource) in the libraries and user code.
```

> The events are then serialized and can be written directly to a file or consumed through a Diagnostics Port from out-of-proces. On Windows, Diagnostic Ports are implemented as `NamedPipe`s. On non-Windows platforms, such as Linux or macOS, it is implemented as Unix Domain Sockets. For more information about the Diagnostics Port and how to interact with it via its custom inter-process communication protocol, see the [diagnostics IPC protocol documentation](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/design-docs/ipc-protocol.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The events are then serialized and can be written directly to a file or consumed through a Diagnostics Port from out-of-proces. On Windows, Diagnostic Ports are implemented as `NamedPipe`s. On non-Windows platforms, such as Linux or macOS, it is implemented using Unix Domain Sockets. For more information about the Diagnostics Port and how to interact with it via its custom inter-process communication protocol, see the [diagnostics IPC protocol documentation](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/design-docs/ipc-protocol.md).
```

The following table is a summary of the differences between EventPipe and ETW/LTTng.

|Feature|EventPipe|ETW|LTTng|
|-------|---------|---|-----------|
|Cross-platform|Yes|No (only on Windows)|No (only on supported Linux distros)|
|Require admin/root privilege|No|Yes|Yes|
|Can get OS/kernel events|No|Yes|Yes|
|Can resolve native callstacks|No|Yes|Yes|

## Use EventPipe to trace your .NET application

You can use EventPipe to trace your .NET application in many ways:

* Use one of the [diagnostics tools](#tools-using-eventpipe) that are built on top of EventPipe.

* Use [Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/diagnostics-client-library-instructions.md) library to write your own tool to configure and start EventPipe sessions yourself.

* Use [environment variables](#trace-using-environment-variables) to start EventPipe.

> After you've produced a `nettrace` file that contains your EventPipe events, you can view the file in [`PerfView`](https://github.com/Microsoft/perfview#perfview-overview) or Visual Studio. On non-Windows platforms, you can convert the `nettrace` file to a `speedscope` or `Chromium` trace format by using [`dotnet-trace convert`](./dotnet-trace.md#dotnet-trace-convert) command and view it with [`speedscope`](https://www.speedscope.app/) or Chrome DevTools.

Reviewer: If possible, can we include a screencap of one of these views of a trace?  It doesn't necessarily need to be in the PR, but having graphics would be nice.

Author: Will do the screenshots later when I go back to doing those.
